Add support for the Strimzi Metrics Reporter to Kafka brokers/controllers components (#11051)
strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator: documentation/modules/con-common-configuration-properties.adoc

== `metricsConfig`

Use the `metricsConfig` property to enable and configure Prometheus metrics.
Strimzi provides support for Prometheus JMX Exporter and Strimzi Metrics Reporter. Only one of these can be selected at any given time.

When metrics are enabled, they are exposed on port 9404.

When the `metricsConfig` property is not defined in the resource, the Prometheus metrics are not enabled.

For more information about setting up and deploying Prometheus and Grafana, see link:{BookURLDeploying}#assembly-metrics-str[Introducing Metrics to Kafka^].

.Using Prometheus JMX Exporter
The `metricsConfig` property contains a reference to a `ConfigMap` that has additional configurations for the {JMXExporter}.
When configured to use Prometheus JMX Exporter, Strimzi converts the JMX metrics provided by Apache Kafka into a Prometheus-compatible format.

> To enable Prometheus metrics export without further configuration, you can reference a `ConfigMap` containing an empty file under `metricsConfig.valueFrom.configMapKeyRef.key`.

Reviewer: It is enforced by the model:

```sh
2025-04-08 10:26:22 WARN  AbstractOperator:566 - Reconciliation #3(watch) Kafka(test/my-cluster): Failed to reconcile
io.strimzi.operator.common.model.InvalidResourceException: Metrics configuration is invalid: [Config Map reference is missing]
```

== `metricsConfig`

Use the `metricsConfig` property to enable and configure Prometheus metrics.
Strimzi provides support for Prometheus JMX Exporter and Strimzi Metrics Reporter. Only one of these can be selected at any given time.

When metrics are enabled, they are exposed on port 9404.

> When the `metricsConfig` (or deprecated `metrics`) property is not defined in the resource, the Prometheus metrics are disabled.

Reviewer 2: Maybe we don't need the deprecated mention in brackets anymore?

Author: Removed

> When the `metricsConfig` (or deprecated `metrics`) property is not defined in the resource, the Prometheus metrics are disabled.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When the `metricsConfig` property is not defined in the resource, the Prometheus metrics are not enabled.
```

Author: Refactored

For more information about setting up and deploying Prometheus and Grafana, see link:{BookURLDeploying}#assembly-metrics-str[Introducing Metrics to Kafka^].

.Using Prometheus JMX Exporter

> The `metricsConfig` property contains a reference to a ConfigMap that has additional configurations for the {JMXExporter}.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `metricsConfig` property contains a reference to a `ConfigMap` that has additional configurations for the {JMXExporter}.
```

Reviewer 2: Can you update the ConfigMap to `ConfigMap` on line 448 too? Thanks!

Author: Fixed

> Strimzi supports Prometheus metrics using Prometheus JMX exporter to convert the JMX metrics supported by Apache Kafka to Prometheus metrics.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When configured to use Prometheus JMX Exporter, Strimzi converts the JMX metrics provided by Apache Kafka into a Prometheus-compatible format.
```

Author: Refactored

    # ...
----

.Using Strimzi Metrics Reporter
The `metricsConfig` property contains configurations for the {StrimziMetricsReporter}.

> When configured to use Strimzi Metrics Reporter, Strimzi exposes the metrics provided by Apache Kafka directly.

Reviewer 3: I do not think this means anything ... what exactly is _direct_ here?

Reviewer 3: I think for user documentation, that is meaningless. If you want to explain the difference, you should focus on something that explains the value for them.

Reviewer: new attempt: The Strimzi Metrics Reporter offers a lightweight solution for exposing Kafka metrics in Prometheus format, eliminating the need for intermediate layers like JMX or Java agents, and avoiding complex mapping rules that can introduce latency.

Reviewer 3: What about leaving out the `eliminating the need for intermediate layers like JMX or Java agents` part? But yes, I think this looks reasonable.

> Strimzi supports Prometheus metrics using Strimzi Metrics Reporter to directly expose the metrics provided by Apache Kafka (JMX is not required).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When configured to use Strimzi Metrics Reporter, Strimzi exposes the metrics provided by Apache Kafka directly.
JMX is not required.
```

Author: Refactored

To enable Strimzi Metrics Reporter, set the type to `strimziMetricsReporter`.

> The `allowList` configuration is a comma separated list of regex patterns to filter the metrics that are collected. This defaults to `.*`,  which allows all metrics.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `allowList` configuration is a comma-separated list of regex patterns to filter the metrics that are collected. This defaults to `.*`,  which allows all metrics.
```

Author: Fixed

> NOTE: Using `strimziMetricsReporter` is only supported in the Kafka component at the moment.

Reviewer 3: You should explain what _Kafka component_ is ...

```suggestion
NOTE: Using `strimziMetricsReporter` is only supported in the Kafka brokers and controllers at the moment.
```

> NOTE: Using `strimziMetricsReporter` is only supported in the Kafka component.

Reviewer 2: Maybe we should be clearer about what and what isn't supported here?

Author: ```suggestion
NOTE: Using `strimziMetricsReporter` is only supported in the Kafka component at the moment.
```

Author: Maybe if we note the components that are not supported, the user might read that as `it won't be supported ever`.
